[MGDOBR-403] Improve deployment scripts for local dev (#423)
5733d9e2be6485d52ffa08870cabdee0/sandbox: dev/README.md

# DEV

This guide uses [a set of BASH scripts](bin) to make the local development experience easier.

## Requirements

**IMPORTANT: unless specified, all the commands are supposed to be executed from the root of the repository**

You will need the following installed locally on your machine to support local development:

> * [Minikube v1.25.2](https://minikube.sigs.k8s.io/docs/start/) or [Kind](https://kind.sigs.k8s.io/docs/user/quick-start)

Author: gonna add it

> * [Minikube v1.25.2](https://minikube.sigs.k8s.io/docs/start/) or [Kind](https://kind.sigs.k8s.io/docs/user/quick-start)

Author: don't know how much time my PR will take to be merged. so better to merge the one from @lucamolteni first and will rebase mine then

> * [Minikube v1.25.2](https://minikube.sigs.k8s.io/docs/start/) or [Kind](https://kind.sigs.k8s.io/docs/user/quick-start)

Reviewer: Yes rebase will fix this

* [curl](https://curl.se/) (or any other HTTP client)
* Many of us use and recommend [PostMan](https://postman.com) for testing our API instead of curl.

## Dev configuration

> Configuration can be done via environment variables or via the `dev/bin/localconfig` file.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Configuration can be done via environment variables or via the `dev/config/localconfig` file.
```

Managed services require some **mandatory** variables:

| Name                                   | Description                                                                                                                                      |
|:---------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `MANAGED_CONNECTORS_NAMESPACE_ID` | ID of the namespace where Managed Connectors are deployed, required to use Managed Connectors based actions. Skip it if you don't need MC actions. |
| `MANAGED_CONNECTORS_CONTROL_PLANE_URL` | URL of the MC control plane, required to use Managed Connectors based actions. Skip it if you don't need MC actions. |
| `SSO_REDHAT_URL`                       | URL to Red Hat SSO. Default is           https://sso.redhat.com                                                            |
| `OPENSHIFT_OFFLINE_TOKEN`              | OpenShift offline token. To obtain it, go to https://console.redhat.com/openshift/token                                                          |

### Local cluster configuration

> TODO minikube / kind

Reviewer 2: What should this refer to?

Author: I just forgot to remove the TODO ...

```suggestion
```

> TODO minikube / kind
> 

Author: ```suggestion
```

> #### Minikube cofniguration for macOS users

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### Minikube configuration for macOS users
```

With Fedora 34/35, you will need to use the `calico` network in order for Kind to start correctly.

Just add this to your `localconfig` file:

```bash
KIND_CONFIG_FILE=dev/config/kind/config-calico.yaml
KIND_NETWORK=calico
```

## Deploy environment

To deploy the environment, you can use directly the `dev/bin/deploy.sh` script which will operate all for you.  
Or you can use separately the different scripts to just enable what you need.

To get an overview of the capabilities of the `dev/bin/deploy.sh` script, just run

```bash
./dev/bin/deploy.sh -h
```

Some of the scripts from `dev/bin` folder are storing runtime information in `dev/bin/_deploy/local_env` file, in order to keep a state of the current run.

### Deploy dev environment

This will deploy/start the different services:

* on cluster
  * keycloak
  * prometheus operator CRDs
* with docker-compose
  * manager db (postgres)
  * localstack
  * prometheus
  * grafana
* locally
  * manager
  * shard operator

To deploy and run all dev resources, just run:

```bash
./dev/bin/deploy.sh -s -l -k
```

This will:

* start the configured cluster (`-s` option)
* build the local image and push them to cluster (`-l` option)

> * setup kafka resources on managed services (`-k` option)

Author: true... forgot to remove it after the rebase

> * setup kafka resources on managed services (`-k` option)

Author: ```suggestion
```

* run manager and shard operator services locally
  * logs from those services can be found in `dev/bin/logs` folder

The manager URL is http://localhost:8080.

### Deploy "demo" environment on cluster

This will deploy all resources on the cluster:

* keycloak
* prometheus operator CRDs
* manager db (postgres)
* localstack
* prometheus
* grafana
* manager
* shard operator

To deploy and run all dev resources, just run:

```bash
./dev/bin/deploy.sh -s -l -k -a
```

This will:

* start the configured cluster (`-s` option)
* build the local image and push them to cluster (`-l` option)
* setup kafka resources on managed services (`-k` option)
* deploy all services on cluster (`-a` option)
  
The manager URL is http://localhost:80/manager.

## Undeploy resources

To undeploy all resources, just run

```bash
./dev/bin/undeploy.sh
```

If you also want to stop the cluster, just add the `-s` option.

## Detailed scripts from the `dev/bin` folder

The `deploy` and `undeploy` scripts are using other scripts from `dev/bin` folder.

You will find below some explanations of those.

> ### Setup Kafka

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Setup Managed Kafka
```

### Configuration via "localconfig" file

> If a file named `localconfig` is created in the [dev/config](bin) folder, all its content is loaded before every script.

Reviewer 3: you should change the name of the directory also in the link destination, otherwise it will be inconsistent (`[dev/config](config)`)

Author: I need to update the whole doc with this new script :)

Author: doc updated

docker-compose -f dev/docker-compose/docker-compose.yml logs
```

### Start the Fleet Manager

> The [manager-run.sh](bin/manager-run.sh) script starts the Fleet Manager with all the configurations.

Reviewer 4: To be updated? I don't think the script is named `manager-run.sh` anymore (same comment for the other links)

With the parameters `--manager`, `--keycloak`, `--username` and `--password` you can configure the script so to target any environment (for example the demo environment).

The grafana dashboards in the `grafana` folder are just for development purposes, but it's good to keep them in sync with the dashboards deployed in the demo environment (those dashboards are located at `kustomize/overlays/prod/observability/grafana`).

## Binaries migration guide (Apr 22)

## Renamed scripts

Some scripts from the `bin` folder have been renamed for more coherence.  
Here is the list of new names:

| Old name                           | New name                     |
|:-----------------------------------|------------------------------|
| `shard-run.sh`                     | `local-shard-start.sh`       |
| `manager-run.sh`                   | `local-manager-start.sh`     |
| `minikube-start.sh`                | `cluster-start.sh`           |
| `minikube-build-docker-images.sh`  | `cluster-load-containers.sh` |

## Config files moved

On the first execution of the `bin/common.sh` script, configuration files will be automatically transferred to the `config` folder.  

> Here are the moves done:

Reviewer 5: What is the recommended way for this migration. In past , I have never run `bin/common.sh` on its own. Is it the same? If not, we should explicitly mention, that it is first step of migration.

Author: this script is a utils script which is called from all other scripts. You should not need to run it.
Here is maybe a better sentence. Let me know if you are ok with that @jomarko 

```suggestion
On the execution of any script, it should call the `bin/common.sh` script, which will automatically transfer the configuration files to the `config` folder.  
Here are the moves done:
```

Reviewer 5: that sounds better to me @radtriste , yes
